There are many different kinds of therapy for ADHD, though some of the methods may vary between children and adults. Types of therapy used to treat ADHD range from dialectical behavioral therapy to mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is generally considered the gold standard for ADHD psychotherapy. While "regular" CBT can be helpful for ADHD, there are also specific types of CBT for ADHD.

This can help with improving daily life struggles such as procrastinating, time management struggles, and poor planning. CBT helps people find new coping strategies and the emotions and behaviors that interfere with implementing strategies. The CBT for ADHD model is organized around three core modules and two optional ones: Psychoeducation and organizing/planning, Coping with distractibility, and Adaptive thinking. Optional ones include: Addressing procrastination, Involvement of a partner or spouse.

Research has shown that this type of therapy may be helpful because of how meditation and mindfulness affect the brain and neuropsychiatry.3

Some benefits may include: Reducing mind wandering/daydreaming and distractibility by improving the functioning of the default mode network in the brain, which modulates attention, Learning to observe emotional states, Emotional regulation, Improved executive functioning. 

Dialectical behavioral therapy is another form of therapy often used for people with ADHD. This type of therapy is focused on teaching people skills to deal with their ADHD through the following modules: Mindfulness, Emotion regulation, Interpersonal effectiveness, Distress tolerance, Impulsivity/hyperactivity and attention. Its efficacy is proven by the fact that the control patients on a waiting list tended to have worsening troubles with attention and hyperactivity while waiting for treatment.Those receiving the treatment fared better, as measured by the State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI), which assesses emotional regulation and impulse control.

While it is technically not psychotherapy, ADHD coaching is gaining popularity as a way of managing symptoms and quality of life for people with ADHD.6 Though there is no standardized protocol, this type of coaching usually includes goal-setting and homework, discussing successes and roadblocks, and problem-solving.

Coaches use text messages, emails, or phone call reminders to help clients meet their goals. People are often encouraged to use self-rewards or rewards from the coach or others.
Supportive therapy is a form of therapy that helps clients optimize the coping skills that they already have so that these strategies can be used to reduce distress and manage symptoms such as time management and organization.
Interpersonal therapy is typically employed to address issues that may have developed between a client and others due to misunderstandings from their ADHD symptoms, such as if their forgetfulness or procrastination are affecting those in their lives.7

One key feature of this type of therapy is that the therapist may use it to help the client see the difference between their inner experience and how their behaviors affect others. This type of therapy may also address personal issues, such as a sense of failure or low self esteem, that often stem from the challenges people with ADHD traits experiences trying to fit in to society's neurotypical expectations. Group therapy can be a helpful way for people with ADHD to learn from other people dealing with similar types of challenges and how they have dealt with or have overcome them.8

A specific type of group therapy for ADHD-I (Inattentive Type) called CBT for ADHD-I teaches group members planning, how to start activities and end activities, lifestyle changes, and how to troubleshoot where they have issues in these areas.8

It combines applying the techniques in the in-person sessions and homework outside of the groups. Mindfulness meditation is also practiced to help group members reduce stress and improve attention regulation. 

Narrative therapy has been found to be helpful in people with ADHD to help reduce the self-stigma they may experience. Many people with ADHD tell themselves that they are lazy and underachieving, leading them to wonder what the purpose of trying is and thus becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy.

This type of therapy can also help people identify the "sparkling moments" when things are different from the stories they tell themselves so that they can see their strengths rather than their challenges.

One study of school-aged girls who participated in narrative group therapy found improvement in their school performance following the therapy because they identified and replaced negative self-beliefs.9 Narrative therapy also increased their ability to see that they could find their own solutions to problems (as age-appropriate).

For children with ADHD, typically there are two major ways that therapy is delivered: by parents and by teachers; each for different reasons. Both methods are collaborative, with parents and teachers working together, regardless of which one is leading it.

In parent-delivered behavioral therapies, parents will be taught: How to discipline their child consistently and appropriately for their condition, How to implement structure, How to introduce positive reinforcement, and Positive ways to interact with their child.

In teacher-delivered behavioral therapies, teachers learn similar strategies: how to teach children with ADHD to address their challenges, how to help them with time management and organization, and how to help them overcome emotional and behavioral challenges.

Therapy for ADHD may be particularly challenging because it requires the consistency and structure that many people with ADHD struggle with. But the right therapist will create a space where you can feel safe in managing your symptoms and learn how to live with ADHD.
Behavior Therapy, Including Training for Parents
ADHD affects not only a child’s ability to pay attention or sit still at school, it also affects relationships with family and other children.  Children with ADHD often show behaviors that can be very disruptive to others. Behavior therapy is a treatment option that can help reduce these behaviors; it is often helpful to start behavior therapy as soon as a diagnosis is made.

The goals of behavior therapy are to learn or strengthen positive behaviors and eliminate unwanted or problem behaviors. Behavior therapy for ADHD can include

Parent training in behavior management;
Behavior therapy with children; and
Behavioral interventions in the classroom.
These approaches can also be used together. For children who attend early childhood programs, it is usually most effective if parents and educators work together to help the child.

Children younger than 6 years of age
For young children with ADHD, behavior therapy is an important first step before trying medication because:

Parent training in behavior management gives parents the skills and strategies to help their child.
Parent training in behavior management has been shown to work as well as medication for ADHD in young children.
Young children have more side effects from ADHD medications than older children.
The long-term effects of ADHD medications on young children have not been well-studied.Medications
Medication can help children manage their ADHD symptoms in their everyday life and can help them control the behaviors that cause difficulties with family, friends, and at school.

Several different types of medications are FDA-approved to treat ADHD in children as young as 6 years of age:

Stimulants are the best-known and most widely used ADHD medications. Between 70-80% of children with ADHD have fewer ADHD symptoms when taking these fast-acting medications.
Nonstimulants were approved for the treatment of ADHD in 2003. They do not work as quickly as stimulants, but their effect can last up to 24 hours.
Medications can affect children differently and can have side effects such as decreased appetite or sleep problems. One child may respond well to one medication, but not to another.

Healthcare providers who prescribe medication may need to try different medications and doses. The AAP recommends that healthcare providers observe and adjust the dose of medication to find the right balance between benefits and side effects. It is important for parents to work with their child’s healthcare providers to find the medication that works best for their child.

There is no one-size-fits-all solution to manage life in the context of ADHD. Medication is appropriate in many cases but individuals with ADHD still need to have a good understanding of how their unique brains and ADHD traits impact their lives and relationships.

 

ADHD awareness, skills training and ADHD-Informed Therapy can pave the way and provide individuals with specific ways to manage their time, stay organized and on task, and cope with difficult emotions, as well as other typical ADHD challenges.Common Healthy Coping Mechanisms

There’s a popular saying that “nature abhors a vacuum.”  The same tends to apply in psychology.  That’s one of the reasons addicts often struggle in their recovery.  Giving up an addiction leaves a huge void in many different ways.  It also means you’ve given up one of your primary coping mechanisms.  So, now you need to replace it (as well as any other unhealthy coping mechanisms) with something else  – something healthy and life-affirming, rather than detrimental or downright destructive.

Following are a several examples of healthy coping mechanisms. Some will seem like common sense, while others may seem unusual or foreign to you.  Don’t be too quick to rule out any of these, even if they don’t seem like a good fit at first glance.  For example, maybe the idea of meditating sounds a bit too “spiritual” or “new age” for you, or maybe you’ve always hated any type of exercise.  However, since recovery is a new chapter in your life, it’s also the perfect time to open yourself up to new practices. Exercise is hands-down one of the best coping mechanisms.  In addition to helping you achieve and maintain a healthy weight, sleep better, and reduce your risk of developing a multitude of serious health problems, regular exercise also improves your emotional well-being.  Aerobic exercise (e.g. jogging, brisk walking, cycling, and swimming) has been shown to reduce symptoms of anxiety and depression.  In fact, studies have shown regular exercise to be just as effective as taking an antidepressant medication for depression.  It also reduces stress, boosts self-confidence, and enhances self-esteem. If you find a type of exercise you enjoy and / or do it with a partner, you’ll be much more likely to stick with it. Many charities, volunteer organizations, and self-help / inspirational books were borne out of someone’s pain or anger.  For example, a woman who endured a painful, heart-breaking divorce writes a book to help other women see the light at the end of the tunnel.  A man who lost his wife to ovarian cancer starts a charity to raise funds for ovarian cancer research.  Whether you create your own project or join another, channeling negative feelings into something that will help others is a win/win situation and a great way to facilitate healing.  The key here is to “practice” gratitude, as it doesn’t come naturally for most people. This means to consciously look for things  –  no matter how small  –  for which to be truly grateful.  It might be a cool breeze on a hot day or running water  –  things we often take for granted.  Some people find that keeping a daily “gratitude journal” is a great way to implement this coping mechanism.  When you feel sad, angry, or down, read through your gratitude journal to boost your spirits and refocus your thoughts.  There’s a reason therapists recommend journaling  –  the act of writing down your thoughts and feelings  –  to their clients.  Journaling is a great way to express your feelings  –  both positive and negative  –  in a safe, private place.  Doing so on a regular basis will help you gain insight into yourself.  Expressing yourself on paper also helps ensure that you don’t keep negative feelings bottled up.Meditation is often associated with religious practice, but you don’t have to be religious to enjoy its many benefits.  It can be as simple as taking a few minutes to find a quiet place and sit in silence, focusing on nothing more than your breathing.  When practiced regularly, meditation provides numerous mental and physical benefits by inducing deep relaxation, enhancing mindfulness, and reducing stress. As humans, we’re not meant to be socially isolated.  It’s important to have someone  –  a trusted confidante who’s a good listener  –  with whom you can disclose distressing feelings and thoughts.  Talking about them is a good way to work through them.  This is one of the reasons people go to therapy  –  to “talk out” whatever it is that’s troubling them. Sometimes we all just need to take a deep breath.  Formally practicing deep breathing – whenever you feel angry, upset, frustrated, stressed, or anxious – is an excellent way to reduce those negative feelings and calm yourself down.  Practice breathing from the diaphragm, inhaling deeply and exhaling slowly.

65 Tips and Tricks to Better Manage Adult ADHD (Without Meds):
We've compiled a list of ADHD tips and tricks for boosting productivity, sleep, beating procrastination, improving your mood, and much more. Let's jump right in.
Improve productivity
A wall calendar: A dry erase wall calendar is a great way to keep on top of things. You can write appointments and deadlines in bright colors and cross off each day that goes by– this helps a ton with time blindness. 

Use color: People with ADHD are often visually oriented. Use colors to help things stick in your memory, such as highlighting important dates, color-coding files, putting to-dos on bright paper, and adding stickers or color to virtually anything that needs your attention. You can also use color-coding on Google calendar to make things stand out. 

Break down tasks: Have a goal or deadline? Create mini-deadlines along the way. This can help boost confidence and keep you from feeling overwhelmed,

Try the Pomodoro Technique: Set a timer for 20 minutes and begin working on your task. After 20 minutes, take a 5-minute break and repeat again. Give yourself a check mark for every cycle completed.

Reframing: Combat unhelpful thought patterns by reframing tasks in a positive or more realistic way. For instance, if you are delaying beginning a project and your initial thought is, “there’s so much work it’ll take forever,” try checking yourself with a less negative and more realistic thought like, “if I begin this today, I’ll feel better, and there will be less work tomorrow.”

24-Hour Hot Spot: Have a designated area somewhere like your desk where you can place your “need to-dos.” Place anything there that needs your attention within 24 hours so that it doesn’t get lost. 

Pocket Notes: Writing on your hand is risky; try writing important things on notes and putting them in your pocket. Make sure it’s your dominant side pocket, so you’re more likely to reach in there and find your reminder. 

Get Smart(phone): Utilize your notepad, reminder alerts, and calendars to help you meet deadlines. Don’t be shy about setting several obnoxious reminders leading up to your deadline. 

Sleep better with ADHD
Set a Wind-down Alarm: Most smartphones allow you to program your bedtime and will alert you an hour before you intend to be sleeping. Use this alert to power down electronics, dim the lights and begin your bedtime routine.

Happy Lamp: Many people with ADHD have physiological differences in their circadian rhythms that make it hard to get consistent sleep. Using a happy lamp or getting 20 minutes of early morning light exposure is a great way to help boost your circadian rhythm. 

Melatonin: Many people with ADHD have lower levels of melatonin. Try a supplement (0.3mg is the ideal dose) or have melatonin-inducing snacks like tart cherry juice. 

No Late Lattes: It takes your body up to 12 hours to fully metabolize caffeine. Skip caffeinated beverages within 5-7 hours before bed for better sleep.

Quiet your mind: Racing mind keeping you awake? Using techniques like progressive muscle relaxation can help quiet your mind and ease you into sleep.

Get Noisy: Noise machines, especially pink noise (think ocean waves and raindrops), can boost sleep and improve sleep stability. 

Keep it Cool: Turn the temperature in your room down to 65-68 °F (18-20 °C), the ideal temperature range for sleep and melatonin production. 

Wake up at the same time every morning: Your body’s sleep system thrives on consistency. Keeping a regular wake time is the most realistic way to maintain a consistent schedule and regulate your sleep hormones. 

Sleep Mask: Using an eye mask or blackout curtains can completely transform your sleep because darkness is key to keeping melatonin flowing. 

Only use the bed for sleep: Doing non-sleep activities in your bed can create unhelpful associations like bed + work, bed+ horror films, or bed+ existential dread. Only use your bed for sleep (and intimacy); sleep therapists call this stimulus control. 

Get chores done
Start small: Give yourself the luxury of tiny tasks that bring you closer to your big tasks. Need to clean the kitchen? Start with one section of the countertop. Some progress is better than none. Always start one room at a time and narrow it down to one section of that room if needed. 

Grocery apps: Apps like Out of Milk help you track grocery lists using a simple scanning system. You can even sync your list with other people in the household. 

Home routine calendar: Keep things simple by building out a chore list that you can follow each week. Use a wall calendar and lots of colors to remind yourself which chores you should be doing on which days. 

Let your plants live: Keep house plants alive with apps like Happy plant that help you track your watering schedule. 

20-minute rule: Before you allow yourself to indulge in some “downtime” (aka Netflix binge), earn the privilege with the 20-minute rule. Simply set a timer for 20-minutes and use that time to tackle a task. You can do the same task every time, such as cleaning up the clothes in your room. Try making a game out of it if you have a spouse or kids! 

Make it fun: Chores can feel daunting, but they aren’t actually that bad. Set the tone by adding fun tunes, putting on a cute “cleaning outfit,” and set your focus on one single task at a time. 

Invite people over: Nothing motivates you to tidy up quite like a guest. Make an attempt to have people over for dinner or drinks regularly and use it as motivation to tidy up. 

Ask for Help: if you feel overwhelmed, ask for help. Reaching out to a loved one can make it feel less overwhelming, and sometimes all you need is a little encouragement to get started. Plus, maybe they have time to lend a hand. 

Make it fitness: Put on your pedometer and vow to use chores as your workout for the day. 

Hunt for old food: Pick a day of the week where you empty old food from the fridge (feeling seen now, aren’t you?). 

Control & reduce ADHD impulsivity
The 24-hour rule: Whenever you go to make an impulsive decision or impulsively sign-up for something, give yourself a mandatory cooling-off period. Aim for at least 24-hours before diving in. If it’s actually something you “need,” the desire will still be there. 

Where will this live? When shopping and feeling compelled to buy, ask yourself, “where will this live?” Stopping to visualize its place in your life can lead to a humbling moment of clarity. 

Repeat before speaking: Impulsive reactions are hard to control. When listening, make an effort to paraphrase what was said before going ahead with your response. It will not only clarify any potential misconceptions but will also give you a second to mull over your response. 

Analyze yourself: Practice labeling your impulsivity by writing out the situation, how you felt before you acted, and what you need to do next time to stop the impulsive behavior. Approach it like a logical scientist trying to solve a puzzle. 

Elastic Band: Put an elastic band around your wrist, and whenever you feel the urge to act impulsively, snap the band. It’s a technique that brings your senses back to the present moment and can help break unhelpful patterns. 

Note it: Before speaking up in meetings or discussions give yourself a moment to write it out. You can use a notepad or your phone to quickly note what you want to say and bring it up later if it’s still important. 

Meditate: Daily meditation practice helps improve your ability to pause before acting. You can start with as little as 2-3 minutes a day and aim to work up to 10-20 minutes. 

Exercise: Daily activity is an excellent way to get rid of feelings of angst and restlessness that feed impulsive behaviors. Aim for 20 minutes a day and do something you enjoy. Even a daily walk is enough for major benefits. 

Practice pausing: Make an effort to carefully listen to every word when someone is talking and then take a three second pause before speaking. You can start out with someone you trust then try it out in the wild. 

Apologize: Interrupting happens. If you cut someone off acknowledge it, apologize, and give them a chance to finish their thought. Explain why you did it if you feel like it. 

Overcome procrastination
Lock Box: Phones are one of the biggest distractions, especially for people with ADHD. Use a timed lock box to put away your phone when you have important tasks to do! Tik Tok will still be there when you’re done. 

Look around you: Creating a clear space that is void of distractions is pretty important for productivity. Do your best to have a clear space or use baskets to hide distractions while you’re working. 

Just do the thing: Whenever possible, do things immediately. When life gets busy or distractions come along the ADHD mind has a hard time regrouping. No matter how annoying it may feel, take a deep breath, put on your disciplined pants, and just do the thing. 

Get stimulated: ADHD minds often feel understimulated which can lead to dropping boring tasks for more exciting ones. Add in a fidget spinner, soothing music, slime, exercise, a podcast or anything that helps you get going. It’s perfectly ok to pair activities as long as it helps you move closer to your goal. 

Try L-Theanine with caffeine: Supplementing L-theanine with Caffeine can help boost the “focus” effects of caffeine while lulling anxiety. Studies show this combo helps improve sustained attention and cognitive performance in people with ADHD.

Positive Self-talk: Meet your negative inner voice with an encouraging one. Try phrases like “I tried my best and that’s enough”,  “nothing is perfect, it’s ok to be human”, or “I am strong, capable, and I can get through anything.”

Hug your inner child: Many people with ADHD grow up feeling misunderstood, so, positive reassurance from your adult self to your inner child can go a long way. Imagine your inner child and give them an little encouraging hug. Try cheering them on and letting them know that you’ll do your best to guide them through life with acceptance and understanding. 

Clarify your goals: Clarify your final goal and then break down the “mini” goals you need to meet along the way to get there. Focus on the very first mini-goal, set a deadline, and work on that alone. If you still feel overwhelmed, break your mini-goals down further. The point is to just get moving ahead. 

Better manage your mood
Schedule downtime: Set aside some time every week (or even a slot every day) to just do whatever the heck you want. You can blast music, zone out on your phone, indulge in a hobby– whatever brings you joy. Scheduling in this “do whatever I want” time brings structure to much-needed downtime, so you don’t end up wasting hours then feeling guilty. 

Accept the highs and lows: Learning to accept the emotions that you experience without judgement can bring a ton of relief. When you feel extremely sad, frustrated or anxious, try not to fight it or seek a reason. Sit with the feeling, allow the thoughts to come and go without judgement, and remind yourself that everything passes in time. Emotions aren’t the end of the world; they’ll just make you uncomfortable for a little while. 

Journal it: Writing out your thoughts and feelings every day, or when upset, can help you work through what you’re experiencing and find calm. 

Breathwork: Feeling frazzled, overwhelmed, and anxious is a common concern with ADHD. When you feel these sensations, try to focus on your breath and take a few deep breaths in through your nose and slow breaths out through your mouth. It activates your parasympathetic nervous system, which calms down your body’s stress response.  

Take a time-out: When you feel angry, frustrated, overstimulated or ready to lash out – take a time-out. You can choose a walk, sitting quietly, headphones and soothing music, or anything that brings you calm. Feel empowered to remove yourself from situations in order to take care of your mental health. 

Learn to be kind: Your brain is wired in a way that makes planning, attention, biting your tongue and execution of daily tasks challenging. Instead of being mean to yourself when things go wrong, try to develop an open dialogue. You can try phrases like “ok, ADHD, you win this round.” 

Find like-minded people: Being surrounded by people who understand you is important. If your current circle is open, try sharing articles about ADHD or telling them what it’s like. You can also find support groups online, ADHD forums or Instagram accounts that help you feel seen and understood. 

Get a therapist: Therapy can be a huge help for learning emotional regulation skills and self-acceptance. Think of therapy as personal training for your brain– sometimes, you need a little guidance to whip things into shape. There are many online options available now which makes therapy more convenient and affordable than ever. 

Self-care
Identify triggers: Knowing what triggers you is important. Identify sounds, situations, and even people who cause you to feel overwhelmed and frustrated and plan for it. It may be as simple as carrying earplugs or headphones. 

Schedule a meal: Skipping meals and binging is a hard habit to break. Do your best to get in a protein-rich meal or shake early in the day, no matter what. It will help regulate your appetite and make sure your body has what it needs to make things like dopamine. 

Hygiene: Staying on top of hygiene routines can sometimes be hard, yet other times you’re pulling off 25-step skincare routines.  Try simplifying when you’re struggling, use dry shampoo, seek an accountability buddy, and be kind to yourself about the ups and downs. 

Stains happen: ADHD is a life of stains. Become a stain-removing guru using tips from this site and save your favorite clothes. 

Add yoga: Even just 10-15 minutes a day of yoga can make a huge difference for your wellbeing, frustration tolerance, and stress levels.

Add a mantra: Sometimes, you’re going to have a hard day. Try repeating a mantra like “Now is not forever. Be here now.”

Practice Gratitude: Add a reminder on your phone for the same time every day to practice gratitude. Stop what you are doing when it goes off, and think of one thing you are truly grateful for in that moment. Do your best to sit with it for just 60 seconds. 

Indulge when down: Give yourself permission to put on a face mask, have a hearty snack, and watch your favorite show at the end of a hard day. Sometimes you just need to treat yourself to a dream date…with yourself. Take the time you need, and don’t feel like you’re being selfish.

Build boundaries: It’s hard to say no. Avoid burning yourself out by giving yourself permission to not participate or to bow out if you’ve agreed to something without thinking it through. 

Take off your cape: Being a superhero is fun, but you can lose yourself along the way. You don’t have to take care of everyone, and you don’t have to be perfect. Try to stay realistic in how much you can balance and repeat the phrase “I am human.”

Love yourself: Write a positive affirmation on a sticky note and place it on a mirror you see every day. Make sure it’s placed where you’ll always read it. Start with something like “I am enough” and switch it up regularly to create subtle inner self-hype and love. You deserve it.

How to deal with Adult ADHD (or ADD)
If you have attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), previously known as ADD, everything from paying the bills on time to keeping up with work, family, and social demands can seem overwhelming. ADHD can present challenges for adults across all areas of life and can be tough on your health and both your personal and on-the-job relationships. Your symptoms may lead to extreme procrastination, trouble meeting deadlines, and impulsive behavior. In addition, you may feel that friends and family don’t understand what you’re up against.

Fortunately, there are skills you can learn to help control your symptoms of ADHD. You can improve your daily habits, learn to recognize and use your strengths, and develop techniques that help you work more efficiently, maintain organization, and interact better with others. Part of helping yourself may also include educating others to help them understand what you’re going through.

Change won’t happen overnight, though. These ADHD self-help strategies require practice, patience, and, perhaps most importantly, a positive attitude. But by taking advantage of these techniques, you can become more productive, organized, and in control of your life—and improve your sense of self-worth.

Adult ADHD self-help myths
Myth:
Medication is the only way to solve my ADHD.

Fact:
While medication can help some people manage the symptoms of ADHD, it is not a cure, nor is it the only solution. If taken at all, it should be used in conjunction with other treatments or self-help strategies.

Myth:
Having ADHD means I’m lazy or unintelligent, so I won’t be able to help myself.

Fact:
The effects of ADHD may have caused you and others to label you this way, but the truth is that you are not unmotivated or unintelligent—you have a disorder that gets in the way of certain normal functions. In fact, adults with ADHD often have to find very smart ways to compensate for their disorder.

Myth:
A health professional can solve all my ADHD problems.

Fact:
Health professionals can help you manage symptoms of ADHD, but they can only do so much. You’re the one living with the problems, so you’re the one who can make the most difference in overcoming them.

Myth:
ADHD is a life sentence—I’ll always suffer from its symptoms.

Fact:
While it’s true that there is no cure for ADHD, there is a lot you can do to reduce the problems it can cause. Once you become accustomed to using strategies to help yourself, you may find that managing your symptoms becomes second nature.
Tips for getting organized and controlling clutter
The hallmark traits of ADHD are inattention and distractibility—making organization perhaps the biggest challenge adults with the disorder face. If you have ADHD, the prospect of getting organized, whether it be at work or home, may leave you feeling overwhelmed.

However, you can learn to break tasks down into smaller steps and follow a systematic approach to organization. By implementing various structures and routines, and taking advantage of tools such as daily planners and reminders, you can set yourself up to maintain organization and control clutter.

Develop structure and neat habits—and keep them up
To organize a room, home, or office, start by categorizing your objects, deciding which are necessary and which can be stored or discarded. To organize yourself, get in the habit of taking notes and writing lists. Maintain your newly organized structure with regular, daily routines.

Create space. Ask yourself what you need on a daily basis, and find storage bins or closets for things you don’t. Designate specific areas for things like keys, bills, and other items that can be easily misplaced. Throw away things you don’t need.

Use a calendar app or day planner. Effective use of a day planner or a calendar on your smartphone or computer can help you remember appointments and deadlines. With electronic calendars, you can also set up automatic reminders so scheduled events don’t slip your mind.

Use lists. Make use of lists and notes to keep track of regularly scheduled tasks, projects, deadlines, and appointments. If you decide to use a daily planner, keep all lists and notes inside it. You also have many options for use on your smartphone or computer. Search for “to do” apps or task managers.

Deal with it now. You can avoid forgetfulness, clutter, and procrastination by filing papers, cleaning up messes, or returning phone calls immediately, not sometime in the future. If a task can be done in two minutes or less, do it on the spot, rather than putting it off for later.

Tame your paper trail
If you have ADHD, paperwork might make up a major part of your disorganization. But you can put a stop to the endless piles of mail and papers strewn across your kitchen, desk, or office. All it takes is some time to set up a paperwork system that works for you.

Deal with mail on a daily basis. Set aside a few minutes each day to deal with the mail, preferably as soon as you bring it inside. It helps to have a designated spot where you can sort the mail and either trash it, file it, or act on it.

Go paperless. Minimize the amount of paper you have to deal with. Request electronic statements and bills instead of paper copies. In the U.S., you can reduce junk mail by opting out of the Direct Marketing Association’s (DMA) Mail Preference Service.

Set up a filing system. Use dividers or separate file folders for different types of documents (such as medical records, receipts, and income statements). Label and color-code your files so that you can find what you need quickly.

Tips for managing your time and staying on schedule
Trouble with time management is a common effect of ADHD. You may frequently lose track of time, miss deadlines, procrastinate, underestimate how much time you need for tasks, or find yourself doing things in the wrong order. Many adults with ADHD spend so much time on one task—known as “hyperfocusing”—that nothing else gets done. These difficulties can leave you feeling frustrated and inept, and make others impatient. But, there are solutions to help you better manage your time.

Time management tips
Adults with attention deficit disorder often have a different perception of how time passes. To align your sense of time with everyone else, use the oldest trick in the book: a clock.

Become a clock-watcher. Use a wristwatch or highly visible wall or desk clock to help you keep track of time. When you start a task, make a note of the time by saying it out loud or writing it down.

Use timers. Allot yourself limited amounts of time for each task and use a timer or alarm to alert you when your time is up. For longer tasks, consider setting an alarm to go off at regular intervals to keep you productive and aware of how much time is going by.

Give yourself more time than you think you need. Adults with ADHD are notoriously bad at estimating how long it will take to do something. For every thirty minutes of time you think it will take you to get someplace or complete a task, give yourself a cushion by adding ten minutes.

Plan to be early and set up reminders. Write down appointments for fifteen minutes earlier than they really are. Set up reminders to ensure you leave on time and make sure you have everything you need ahead of time so you’re not frantically looking for your keys or phone when it’s time to go.

Prioritization tips
Because adults with ADHD often struggle with impulse control and jump from one subject to another, completing tasks can be difficult and large projects can seem overwhelming. To overcome this:

Decide what to tackle first. Ask yourself what the most important task is that you need to accomplish, and then order your other priorities after that one.

Take things one at a time. Break down large projects or jobs into smaller, manageable steps.

Stay on task. Avoid getting sidetracked by sticking to your schedule, using a timer to enforce it if necessary.

Learn to say no
Impulsiveness can lead adults with ADHD to agree to too many projects at work or make too many social engagements. But a jam-packed schedule can leave you feeling overwhelmed, overtired, and affect the quality of your work. Saying no to certain commitments may improve your ability to accomplish tasks, keep social dates, and live a healthier lifestyle. Check your schedule first before agreeing to something new.

Tips for managing money and bills
Money management requires budgeting, planning, and organization, so for many adults with ADHD, it can pose a true challenge. Many common systems of money management don’t tend to work for adults with ADHD because they require too much time, paper, and attention to detail. But if you create your own system that is both simple and consistent, you can get on top of your finances and put a stop to overspending, overdue bills, and penalties for missed deadlines.

Control your budget
An honest assessment of your financial situation is the first step to getting budgeting under control. Start by keeping track of every expense, no matter how small, for a month. This will allow you to effectively analyze where your money is going. You may be surprised at how much you’re spending on unnecessary items and impulse purchases. You can then use this snapshot of your spending habits to create a monthly budget based on your income and needs.

Figure out how you can avoid straying from your budget. For example, if you’re spending too much at restaurants, you can make an eating-in plan and factor in time for grocery shopping and meal preparation.

Set up a simple money management and bill paying system
Establish an easy, organized system that helps you save documents, receipts, and stay on top of bills. For an adult with ADHD, the opportunity to manage banking on the computer can be the gift that keeps on giving. Organizing money online means less paperwork, no messy handwriting, and no misplaced slips.

Switch to online banking. Signing up for online banking can turn the hit-or-miss process of balancing your budget into a thing of the past. Your online account will list all deposits and payments, tracking your balance automatically, to the penny, every day. You can also set up automatic payments for your regular monthly bills and log on as needed to pay irregular and occasional ones. The best part: no misplaced envelopes or late fees.

Set up bill pay reminders. If you prefer not to set up automatic payments, you can still make the process of bill paying easier with electronic reminders. You may be able to set up text or email reminders through online banking or you can schedule them in your calendar app.

Take advantage of technology. Free services can help you keep track of your finances and accounts. They typically take some time to set up, but once you’ve linked your accounts they automatically update. Such tools can make your financial life easier.

Put a stop to impulse shopping
Impulsivity from ADHD and shopping can be a very dangerous combination. It can put you in debt and make you feel guilty and ashamed. You can prevent impulsive buys with a few strategic tactics.

Shop with cash only—leave your checkbook and credit cards at home.
Cut up all but one credit card. When you shop, make a list of what you need and stick to it.
Use a calculator to keep a running total when shopping (hint: there’s one on your mobile phone).
Stay away from places where you’re likely to spend too much money, throw away catalogs as they arrive, and block emails from retailers.
Tips for staying focused and productive at work
ADHD can create special challenges at work. The things you may find toughest—organization, completion of tasks, sitting still, listening quietly—are the very things you’re often asked to do all day long.

Juggling ADHD and a challenging job is no easy task, but by tailoring your workplace environment you can take advantage of your strong points while minimizing the negative impact of your ADHD symptoms.

Get organized at work
Organize your office, cubicle, or desk, one manageable step at a time. Then use the following strategies to stay tidy and organized:

Set aside daily time for organization. Mess is always distracting so set aside 5 to 10 minutes a day to clear your desk and organize your paperwork. Experiment with storing things inside your desk or in bins so that they don’t clutter your workspace as unnecessary distractions.

Use colors and lists. Color-coding can be very useful to people with ADHD. Manage forgetfulness by writing everything down.

Prioritize. More important tasks should be placed first on your to-do list so you remember to do them before lower priority tasks. Set deadlines for everything, even if they are self-imposed.

End distractions
When you have attention issues, where you work and what is around you can significantly affect how much you are able to get done. Let your workmates know you need to concentrate, and try the following techniques to minimize distractions:

Where you work matters. If you don’t have your own office, you may be able to take your work to an empty office or conference room. If you are in a lecture hall or conference, try sitting close to the speaker and away from people who chat during the meeting.

Minimize external commotion. Face your desk towards a wall and keep your workplace free of clutter. To discourage interruptions, you could even hang a “Do Not Disturb” sign. If possible, let voicemail pick up your phone calls and return them later, turn off email and social media during certain times of the day, or even log off the Internet completely. If noise distracts you, consider noise-canceling headphones or a sound machine

Save big ideas for later. All those great concepts or random thoughts that keep popping into your head and distracting you? Jot them down on paper or on your smartphone for later consideration. Some people with ADHD like to schedule time at the end of the day to go through all the notes they’ve made.

Stretch your attention span
As an adult with ADHD, you are capable of focusing—it’s just that you may have a hard time keeping that focus, especially when the activity isn’t one that you find particularly engaging. Boring meetings or lectures are hard on anyone, but for adults with ADHD, they may pose a special challenge. Similarly, following multiple directions can also be difficult for those with ADHD. Use these tips to improve your focus and ability to follow instructions:

Get it in writing. If you’re attending a meeting, lecture, workshop, or another gathering that requires close attention, ask for an advance copy of the relevant materials—such as a meeting agenda or lecture outline. At the meeting, use the written notes to guide your active listening and note taking. Writing as you listen will help you stay focused on the speaker’s words.

Echo directions. After someone gives verbal instructions, say them aloud to make sure you got it right.

Move around. To prevent restlessness and fidgeting, go ahead and move around—at the appropriate times in the right places. As long as you are not disturbing others, try squeezing a stress ball during a meeting, for example. Or taking a walk or even jumping up and down during a meeting break can help you pay attention later on.

Tips for managing stress and boosting mood
Due to the impulsivity and disorganization that often accompany ADHD, you may struggle with erratic sleep, an unhealthy diet, or the effects of too little exercise—all issues that can lead to extra stress, bad moods, and feeling out of control. The best way to stop this cycle is to take charge of your lifestyle habits and create healthy new routines.

Eating well, getting plenty of sleep, and exercising regularly can help you stay calm, minimize mood swings, and fight any symptoms of anxiety and depression. Healthier habits can also reduce ADHD symptoms like inattention, hyperactivity, and distractibility, while regular routines can help your life feel more manageable.

Exercise and spend time outdoors
Working out is perhaps the most positive and efficient way to reduce hyperactivity and inattention from ADHD. Exercise can relieve stress, boost your mood, and calm your mind, helping work off the excess energy and aggression that can get in the way of relationships and feeling stable.

Exercise on a daily basis. Choose something vigorous and fun that you can stick with, like a team sport or working out with a friend.

Increase stress relief by exercising outdoors—people with ADHD often benefit from sunshine and green surroundings.

Try relaxing forms of exercise, such as mindful walking, yoga, or tai chi. In addition to relieving stress, they can teach you to better control your attention and impulses.

Get plenty of sleep
Sleep deprivation can increase symptoms of adult ADHD, reducing your ability to cope with stress and maintain focus during the day. Simple changes to daytime habits go a long way toward ensuring solid nightly sleep.

Avoid caffeine late in the day.
Exercise vigorously and regularly, but not within an hour of bedtime.
Create a predictable and quiet “bedtime” routine, including taking a hot shower or bath just before bed.
Stick to a regular sleep-wake schedule, even on weekends.
Eat healthfully
While unhealthy eating habits don’t cause ADHD, a poor diet can exacerbate symptoms. By making simple changes in what and how you eat, you may experience big reductions in distractibility, hyperactivity, and stress levels.

Eat small meals throughout day.
Avoid sugar and junk food as much as possible.
Make sure you include healthy protein at every meal.
Aim for several servings of fiber-rich whole grains each day.
Practice mindfulness
As well as reducing stress, regular mindfulness meditation can help you to better resist distractions, lower impulsivity, improve your focus, and provide more control over your emotions. Since hyperactivity symptoms can make meditation a challenge for some adults with ADHD, starting slowly can help. Meditate for short periods and gradually increase your meditation time as you become more comfortable with the process—and are better able to maintain focus. The key is to then draw on these mindfulness techniques during your daily life to keep you on track. Experiment with free or inexpensive smartphone apps or online guided meditations. 

Hotlines and support
In the U.S.
Talk with an ADHD Information Specialist at 1-866-200-8098, Monday-Friday, 1-5 pm ET, or search the Professional Directory for ADHD clinics and other resources. (CHADD)

UK
Call ADDISS at 020 8952 2800 or consult a list of support groups from AADD-UK.

Australia
Call the Health Direct 24-hour advice line at 1800 022 222 or find a list of ADHD Australia support groups.

Canada
Find support groups and other resources. (CADDAC)

India
Call the Vandrevala Foundation Helpline  at 1860 2662 345 or 1800 2333 330


People with ADHD have brain differences that affect their attention. They are distracted more easily than people who don’t have it. They often have trouble staying organized, staying focused on a task, and finishing what they start.

ADHD affects behavior, too. Some people may have trouble sitting still, waiting, or listening. Some interrupt too often, or are quick to get upset. Some do things in a rush instead of taking their time. ADHD affects different people in different ways.

If you have ADHD, you know it can make you feel misunderstood and frustrated at times. ADHD makes it harder to do your best at school, at home, and with friends. But it doesn't have to hold you back. Instead, learn as much as you can about it.

It takes time to learn to manage ADHD — there's no quick fix. Managing ADHD might mean taking medicine or working with a therapist. Most people with ADHD do both.

You can also try these tips to help with school:

Sit in the front of class to limit distractions.
Turn off your phone when doing homework. This limits distractions too.
Talk with your teacher about your ADHD. Some students with ADHD need extra time to take tests. Some need smaller class sizes or a quiet place to complete work. Others need a tutor. Ask your teacher to help you plan and do what's right for you.
Use tools that help you stay organized. Keep track of assignments in a planner or on a phone app. List things you need to bring home. Set phone reminders for classes and activities, or write them in a planner.
Get plenty of exercise. Daily exercise can improve attention and school performance for people with ADHD. It also keeps your positive emotions flowing.
Take activity breaks. If you feel restless during school, ask teachers to let you take quick breaks to get up and move. This can help you get focused again when you return to your seat. When you study or do homework, take activity breaks often.
Learn to meditate. Mindfulness meditation can improve attention, memory, and focus. It can reduce stress too. It’s easy to learn. Take a few minutes to practice it every day.
Pay attention to all the good things about you. Having ADHD is one part of you. And there’s so much more. Think of things others like about you. Maybe you’re creative, kind, or funny. Maybe you have a talent for sports, music, dance, or art. Maybe you’re good with tech, building things, or cooking. Make time for the things you enjoy. 
Grow your strengths by using them every day. Spend time with the people who see you for who you are. See yourself that way, too.

If you’re one of the 11 million adults in the United States with adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, you understand how hard it can be to avoid distractions, stay organized and work efficiently. With treatment and behavioral changes, you can learn how to handle ADHD to increase productivity and fulfillment. These simple, effective strategies can help you manage symptoms to focus and thrive.

How to Deal With Adult ADHD
Inattention, impulsivity, disorganization, restlessness, overactivity, lack of focus, behavioral control difficulty and other symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder typically emerge early in life — often before age 12 — and evolve as time goes on.

If you’re older than 18 and experience these symptoms, you’re not alone. ADHD is one of the most prevalent childhood disorders, which continues beyond adolescence for many adults. The National Institute of Mental Health estimates ADHD’s lifetime prevalence in U.S. adults between 18 and 44 is just over 8%. While children with ADHD are more likely to struggle with impulsivity and hyperactivity, adults with ADHD are more likely to experience memory problems, restlessness and lack of mental focus.

Even though you may find that evidence-based treatments like medication and psychotherapy go a long way to help you manage your condition, learning effective behavioral strategies can give you the power to control your ADHD symptoms in the moment. Here are five tactics you can use daily.

1. Get Organized
If you often spend your day trying to figure out where to start but wind up getting very little done by dinnertime, a new organizational approach might be in order. Organization helps you manage activities and time efficiently, removing distractions and potential frustration from your day.

One strategy for a more organized lifestyle is to start writing down a schedule for yourself every night for the following day. Beginning each morning knowing what to expect gives you control over your responsibilities and activities. The act of crossing out completed tasks boosts a positive sense of accomplishment.

Whether you have to go to work, run errands or tackle household chores, it’s helpful to write down your top priorities so you can start your day strong and refocus when you lose momentum. Create a habit of checking your schedule at consistent times throughout each day — first thing in the morning, a second time at midday and once more in the early evening to see if you need to complete any lingering items before bedtime.

To maximize your chances of success, cluster similar tasks together under the same time umbrella. For example, answer emails and return phone calls once in the morning and once in the afternoon, instead of throughout the day. Also, make sure you create a bit of space in your day to allow for unexpected obstacles.

How to Create an Organized Home for Adults With ADHD
Home organization and tackling clutter can feel intimidating for most people, particularly those with ADHD. Due to distractibility, decision-making and difficulty with categorizing, adult organizers with ADHD benefit from a targeted approach:

Focus on only one area or room at a time.
Schedule specific cleaning and organizing times in your planner — plan to spend only 30 minutes to an hour on each task.
Categorize boxes for items as you organize — toss, donate and keep.
When you fill a donation box, make an appointment for that action. Schedule a day and time to take those items to the donation drop-off point.
If distraction continues to interfere with your goals, hire a sympathetic professional organizer for extra help.
How to Stay Organized With ADHD
To maintain the progress of added structure and your newly decluttered space, follow these tips to make organization a habitual ADHD management tool.

Use a day planner: Use a calendar, planner notebook or smart device to record all activities and appointments every day.
Schedule your organization: Add tasks to your planner as actionable appointments. For example, pencil in 15 minutes to tidy up the living room at 7 p.m. every day. Designate 30 minutes to clean up the office as part of an ongoing decluttering project.
Create a “home” for items: Once you determine where an item belongs, consider that location to be its home. For example, place a tray near your entry to hold your keys, sunglasses and wallet — and always return those items to that spot.
Use color coding or labels: For work or personal items, color-coded, labeled storage containers and files can prioritize items by topic or importance.
2. Follow a Routine
Once you’re comfortable organizing your daily schedule, establish an overall routine that helps your day run smoothly, no matter what may crop up. Get used to dropping your keys into your entry tray the moment you walk through the front door. Hang up your jacket in the closet before walking into the living room to sit on the couch. Evaluate your behavioral patterns to develop routines that work for you.

Build routines by developing protocols to tackle regular chores with less effort. To feel less scattered and more accomplished when you go grocery shopping, create a standing list of weekly staples and take a few minutes before you head out the door to add whatever else you may need for the current week to your list.

Routine-Building Tips for Living With ADHD
Building a pattern of repeated behavior takes time and practice. These tips help routine become second nature in reducing stress levels:

Follow a mail routine: Make a system to check and sort mail on specific days and times of the week. Designate an area or container to hold important mail like bills, checks and insurance information and immediately toss out junk mail.
Create a routine for chores: Schedule regular chores like laundry and dishes at set days and times every week.
Use electronic notifications and reminders: Use electronic devices, apps and smart technology to your advantage. Make it a habit to set reminders for appointments and meetings the moment you schedule them. Add notifications for routine responsibilities like taking medications or placing trash outside for pickup.
Make an exercise routine: Fitness increases the availability of dopamine in the brain, which is often at lower levels than usual for people with ADHD. Exercise also reduces anxiety, improves memory, reduces compulsive behavior and improves executive function — the skills used to organize, plan and remember details.
3. Make Big Tasks More Manageable
If you have to complete a long assignment or an overwhelming project that requires multiple steps and great attention to detail, break it down into smaller, more manageable steps that are easier to accomplish.

Use a detailed checklist or write out your task’s separate components to create a step-by-step roadmap that helps you stay on course from start to finish. Initially, it’s not necessary to put these actionable items in order or even get them all down on paper. After you’ve gotten started and have some momentum, you can add items and put your list into alphabetical or chronological order.

Time Management for Adults With ADHD
Organization and routine set the foundation for better time management, but it can feel overwhelming to start a scheduled project. Sometimes you aren’t quite sure how to begin, or the full scope of the duty seems immense. Whenever you experience these mental or physical roadblocks, commit to working for short amounts of time using a timer method.

Break up large projects into smaller tasks. Instead of one big, daunting project to “clean the entire living room,” create separate tasks like this:

Task #1: Collect dishes from the living room and place them in the kitchen sink.
Task #2: Remove items that do not belong in the living room and place them in their homes — toys go back to kids’ rooms, shoes go into the closet.
Task #3: Vacuum the carpet.
Task #4: Wipe down tables and surfaces with polish or cleaning spray.
The next time you need to start a substantial project, try this exercise:

Set a timer for 10 to 15 minutes to do only one of the defined tasks.
For those few minutes, keep your attention focused on that task alone.
When the timer chimes, decide if you have the energy to continue on that task or, if completed, start a new one for an additional 10 to 15 minutes.
If you still feel motivated, reset the timer and continue working in short intervals for as long as you can.
If you’d like to rest, that’s OK — stop the activity and try again later or the following day.
4. Minimize Distractions
When you have a personal or professional work environment that requires a higher level of concentration, minimizing distractions can help you keep your focus for longer stretches of time. Declutter and simplify your surroundings at home to remove distractions and improve focus.

Simplification helps at work, too. Improve your concentration by completing existing projects before starting new ones.

How to Deal With Adult ADHD at Work
What distracts you the most at work? Social media? News alerts? Email? Texts? Your messy desk surface? Noisy co-workers?

Distractions at work are a common challenge for employees with ADHD. Be honest with yourself about what causes your primary distractions and curtail those diversions using these tips.

Turn off notifications: Route calls to voicemail. If you can, turn off message notifications. Check your messages at set times during the day.
Use noise-canceling headphones: Headphones are ideal for busy or loud environments.
Choose a quiet space: Request a quiet office space or cubicle.
Listen to music: Play music or a white noise machine. Research shows that music structure helps the ADHD brain stay on a linear path and address timing deficits. However, not all music works the same way. Loud songs with lyrics can have a distracting effect on some adults with ADHD. The best music options for the benefit of concentration are classical composers and soothing instrumentals.
Adjust your work schedule: Start work earlier in the day or stay later than usual when it’s quieter at the office.
Maintain a clean desk: Keep your workspace clutter-free to prevent visual distraction.
5. Respect Your Limits
If you start each morning feeling optimistic about how much work or activity you can incorporate into your day, you’re not alone. Many people overextend themselves by taking on more tasks than they can handle or underestimating the amount of time they need to get things done.

Nothing creates more pressure than committing yourself beyond your limits day after day. Failing to deliver on your promises, whether you’ve made them to your boss, family, friends or yourself, can take the wind out of your sails and leave you feeling even more scattered than usual.

Learning how to live with ADHD involves recognizing when you’ve reached your limit and need to remove tasks from your plate. When you take time to understand and respect your limits, you empower yourself to commit to less and deliver more often.

Professional Help for ADHD Management for Adults
Here at Advanced Psychiatry Associates, we know that ADHD is a complex disorder that affects each adult uniquely. If you’d like some guidance from a mental health professional to find the strategies and solutions that fit your life, our experienced team is ready to help.

We understand how to deal with ADHD in adults and have dedicated our time and training to providing comprehensive care for our patients. Advanced Psychiatry Associates offers the largest full-service facility in the Sacramento region and provides medication management, therapy and counseling, and mental health treatment all in one place for your convenience. 
Call our office in Folsom, Calif., or schedule an appointment online today.
Growing in lockstep with our scientific understanding of ADHD is our knowledge about epigenetics — the study of how lifestyle factors like nutrition, exercise, and sleep exert real, physical changes on a person’s DNA. ADHD is a genetic disorder, yes. But epigenetic changes to DNA do influence how strongly or weakly those ADHD genes get expressed in day-to-day life. (For more on epigenetics, read Part I of this series HERE.)

In other words, genes aren’t destiny. Though genes do significantly influence ADHD, environment also plays a major role as both a cause and a cure. In other words, families can positively impact ADHD symptoms by modifying their environments in three simple ways: through sleep, exercise, and food changes. Here’s how to get started.

The Power of Sleep
Adequate sleep is a huge benefit to your brain and body. The positive sleep-health connection is well documented, yet sleep is too often neglected by children and adults alike — particularly by those with ADHD, who tend to view it as a “waste of time” or have trouble quieting their minds at night.

Restful, restorative sleep is a powerful tool for regulating mood and maintaining attention throughout the day. Adequate sleep also powers learning: brain-imaging studies1 have repeatedly shown that the brain is highly active during sleep, consolidating and replaying the information it absorbed throughout the day.

[Free Download: Sound Sleep Solutions for Kids with ADHD]

Once established, bad sleep habits are difficult to correct. Children may exhibit behavioral issues surrounding sleep — becoming defiant at bedtime, for instance, or dealing with anxiety at night — that may frustrate exhausted parents as they work to enforce a proper sleep schedule. Older teens and adults may have a warped circadian rhythm that makes going to sleep at night — and waking up early in the morning — exceedingly difficult. And people of all ages may sabotage their sleep by our ever-present screens, which disrupt the brain’s natural light receptors that regulate hormone production.

Action Steps for Sleep
To get sleep habits back on track, follow these steps:

1. No screens — including those of your TV, computer, phone, and video game devices — in the hour before bed. In a pinch, you can download apps or purchase screen covers that replace your device’s light with orange light, which is less likely than blue light to disrupt sleep. It is best, however, to fully avoid screens before bed.
2. Set up a sleep routine, lasting between 30 and 60 minutes, that occurs every night at the same time. It should be unpressured and unhurried, and end on a positive note that allows you or your child to drift off peacefully. For children, the routine can include a bedtime story or a special song with a parent. For adults, it can include taking a warm bath or shower, or drinking a cup of herbal tea while reading. The power lies in the repetition — if you do the same things every night before lying down in bed, your body will associate those activities with calm, restful sleep.

3. Melatonin supplements can benefit older teens and adults, in particular, who need to reset their circadian rhythm. Keep in mind that melatonin can interfere with the natural development of a young child’s sleep cycle. (In fact, due to potential side effects, check with your doctor before starting a melatonin regimen.) Take melatonin a few hours before sleep to stimulate hormone levels to slowly rise before bed. Most people make the mistake of taking melatonin right before they lay down, which can lead to delayed sleep and difficulties waking up in the morning.

[4 Get-to-Sleep Products for Restless Kids]

4. Children with significant sleep problems may benefit from brief behavior therapy programs specifically designed to improve sleep habits. These programs are typically less expensive and time-consuming than traditional behavior therapy; in some cases, parents see improvement after just one session.

Bonus Tip: Students, review your notes two to three hours before bedtime to further stimulate learning. Some research2 has also supported the idea of dispersing a unique, pleasant smell — like peppermint or lavender — while both studying and sleeping, since the resulting association may promote greater retention.

Exercise for Body and Mind
Studies3 suggest that sustained exercise may significantly decrease or even fully reverse the negative epigenetic effects of stress or trauma. Physical activity also promotes brain growth, improves brain efficiency, and strengthens learning abilities. Brain changes associated with exercise are most dramatic in the areas related to ADHD: executive functioning, attention, and working memory.

Studies suggest that exercise has a greater impact on ADHD symptoms than does food — a more commonly promoted treatment strategy. Three meta-analytic reviews4 5 6 in the last year have concluded that, while the body of research on exercise is still small compared to that on medication or therapy, the effect on some people with ADHD can be extraordinary.

Still, families struggle to maintain exercise habits when they feel strapped for time or motivation. Children with ADHD may shy away from team sports — or prefer video games to playing outside — which can make it significantly more difficult for them to get an adequate amount of exercise.

Exercise Action Plan
Follow these tips to build an exercise routine to improve ADHD symptoms:

1. Aim for at least one hour of exercise per day, but remember: it doesn’t have to be all at once. Research7 suggests that four 15-minute bursts are just as effective as an uninterrupted hour, and may be easier to work into a busy schedule.
2. Exercise should be moderate to vigorous — that means you or your child should be breathing hard, but not exhausted.

3. Aim for varied activities that involve muscle learning and coordination, not just aerobic energy. Studies8 show that martial arts, basketball, and dance have a positive impact on ADHD brains.

4. Buddy up. Working out as a family, or with a friend, increases the likelihood of sticking with a routine.

5. If you or your child can’t stick with one activity, try another. Don’t be afraid to experiment to find an exercise option that works for your family.

6. Encourage younger children to engage in outdoor and imaginative play. There’s nothing wrong with indoor exercise, particularly for those who live in urban areas, but children are much more likely to be active independently when they’re playing outdoors.

7. Even a little is better than nothing. Accept imperfection; if you’re having difficulty sticking to a rigid routine, aim instead for small amounts of exercise every day.

[Free Guide: Health & Fitness Lifestyle Changes for Adults with ADHD]

Nutrition Changes for ADHD
Evidence shows that food has major epigenetic effects on the brain. A few key findings include:

The brain is mostly fat, and the fatty cells around neurons are heavily involved in brain signaling. Decades of evidence have pointed to omega-3 fatty acids — found in fish, nuts, and other high-fat foods — as a beneficial nutrient for improving signal strength.
Brain signaling also relies on micronutrients like zinc, iron, and Vitamin D. If levels of these nutrients are deficient — as they often are in children and adults with ADHD — focus, attention, and impulse control will suffer.

It’s challenging, however, to establish food’s exact effect on ADHD symptoms because the overall effect sizes for this treatment are very small. We do know that some individuals don’t respond at all to nutrition changes, while others show vast improvements. There’s no way to know whether changes in what you eat will affect you or your child without trying them.

Nutrition Action Steps
Most families begin with the low-effort strategies detailed below, then move on to the high-effort ones if motivation, resources, and results allow.

Low Effort
1. Shop on the outer edges of the grocery store. This is where you’ll find fresh, non-processed foods to help your family reduce its intake of sugar, artificial additives, and simple carbohydrates.

2. Eliminate or decrease caffeine, especially for children. Adults may find that caffeine helps control ADHD symptoms, and there is some evidence to support this hypothesis. For children, however, the risks associated with excess caffeine consumption are just too great — particularly when combined with the high sugar levels often found in energy and soft drinks.

3. Add cold-water fish or fish oil supplements to your daily routine. It’s recommended that children and adults consume at least 1,000 mg of omega-3 fatty acids per day. If you or your child eat fish or other omega 3 foods regularly, this amount is easily attainable. If not, try taking a daily fish oil supplement.

High Effort
4. Check blood levels for common micronutrients. Ask your doctor to test for mineral deficiencies with a simple blood test. If levels are low, talk with him or her about supplementation. Do not start supplements — particularly iron supplements — without first testing your levels, as excess amounts of these minerals can be dangerous when taken in supplement form.

5. Eliminate trigger foods including sugar, gluten, dairy, and food additives. Elimination food plans are tough to maintain — particularly for picky eaters and independent teens — and may result in a nutrient deficiency if not properly monitored. For best results, eliminate one food at a time (gluten, for instance) or work with a professional to ensure a balanced meal plan.

Creating Synergy
Sleep, nutrition, and exercise overlap and interact with each other throughout the day. Nutritious food creates energy for more intense exercise, for instance, while intense exercise better prepares the body for restful sleep. For best results, aim for positive synergy among the methods you find most effective and easiest to maintain.

This combination looks different for everyone. Applying all of these strategies simultaneously is too ambitious for most people. Instead, focus on the options that make the most sense for your symptoms and lifestyle — and remember that something is better than nothing.

In most cases, sleep, food, and exercise will not replace medication or therapy in a treatment plan, nor should they — they’re most effective as complementary treatments. When used properly, however, they may result in a reduced need for medication, or less intensive counseling. No matter which path you pursue, it’s best to balance professional care with deliberate healthy lifestyle choices in an integrated approach to treatment.
Does your child have difficulty focusing on an activity or seem impulsive in behavior? When symptoms are severe enough and cause ongoing problems in more than one area of your child's life, it could be a sign of a neurobehavioral disorder, such as ADHD.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a chronic condition that affects millions of children and often continues into adulthood. ADHD includes a combination of persistent problems, such as difficulty sustaining attention, hyperactivity and impulsive behavior.

Children with ADHD also may struggle with low self-esteem, school anxiety, troubled relationships and poor performance in school. Symptoms sometimes lessen with age. However, some people never completely outgrow their ADHD symptoms. However, they can learn strategies to be successful.

ADHD subtypes
Inattentive ADHD
Formerly referred to as ADD, people with inattentive ADHD display symptoms of inattention, but do not possess symptoms of hyperactivity or impulsivity.
Hyperactive/Impulsive ADHD
This subset of ADHD display symptoms of impulsivity or hyperactivity, but do not display symptoms of inattention.
Combined
People with combined ADHD display symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity. The is the most common subset of ADHD.
Learn more about the three different types of ADHD.

Gender differences with ADHD
ADHD is more commonly diagnosed in boys than girls, but research into ADHD in adulthood suggests an almost equal balance between men and women. A lower diagnosis rate among females in childhood can result because girls with ADHD are more likely than boys to have the inattentive form of ADHD and less likely to show obvious problems.

More than half of children who experience ADHD in childhood continue to have symptoms as adults. Some women only recognize their ADHD after a child has been diagnosed and the woman begins to see similar behavior in herself. Other women seek treatment because their lives spin out of control, financially, at work or at home.

ADHD treatment
While treatment won't cure ADHD, it can help a great deal with symptoms. Treatment typically involves medications and behavioral interventions. Early diagnosis and treatment can make a big difference in outcome.

It's also important to work with a therapist who specializes in ADHD to learn coping mechanisms that are nonpharmacological to help with ADHD symptoms and behaviors. A therapist can enhance the effectiveness of the medication and give tools to empower those with ADHD using treatments that may involve behavioral, psychological, social, educational and lifestyle interventions.

Behavioral strategies
Here are five behavioral strategies to help manage your child's ADHD:
1. Give praise and rewards when rules are followed.
Children with ADHD often receive and expect criticism more so than other children. This can really impact self-esteem. Some days, you might have to really look for the good behavior, but you should praise good behavior at least five times more often than you criticize bad behavior.

2. Give clear, effective directions or commands.
Make eye contact or gently touch on arm or shoulder to get his or her attention. Give brief, simple steps and short commands that get to the point rather than multiple directions or wordy statements and questions.

3. Establish healthy habits.
If your child is on a medication, it should be taken as prescribed. Contact your child's health care provider if problems arise. Make sure your child is getting enough sleep, eating a well-balanced diet consisting of three meals, a snack and adequate fluids daily, and has an outlet for some form of daily exercise. These healthy habits will help your child to feel his or her best and help minimize ADHD symptoms.

4. Develop routines around homework and chores.
Work together to make a checklist of what needs to be done surrounding daily chores, getting ready for bed and school for your child to refer to when he or she gets off task. Encourage your child to use a daily planner so he or she is aware of all homework assignments. Have an established time and location for homework, and use a timer to remind your child to show you how the homework is going two to four times per hour. Factor in brain breaks if your child needs them and movement between tasks or use of an appropriate fidget.

5. Help your child build relationships, strong social skills and maintain friendships.
Be a good role model of behavior you want your child to use. Factor in some special time three to five days a week with your child that is conflict-free and does not involve a screen to help maintain a strong parent-child relationship. Help your child develop at least one close friendship. With younger children, parents may need to take the lead to arrange and host play dates or get kids involved in activities where there are kids the same age. Get tips for helping your child develop social skills.

Check Your Planner 3 Times a Day

Whether you have ADHD or just too much to remember, organizing tips can help you manage your time and activities better. Get into the habit of putting all your appointments and activities on a calendar. It doesn't matter if it's a day planner, a smartphone app, or just a plain old desk calendar. Keep it in one spot and check it at least three times a day. Make it a habit to check at the same times each day.
Make a New "To Do" List Every Day

Each morning, make a list of the things you want to get done that day. Try to keep your list realistic, so you'll have a good chance of getting to everything. Arrange your tasks in order of importance, putting the most important tasks first. Assign each task a specific time of day. Cross off each task when you complete it.

Start Organizing -- One Room at a Time
Don't be intimidated by the idea of "getting organized." Start by putting things back where they belong and throwing away things you don't need.

Tackle one room at a time -- start with the easiest. Divide the room into sections if you need to.
 Schedule organization time in your planner. Use a timer to manage your work sessions.
Ask yourself whether you want to keep items or toss them. If you're not sure, put them in a separate box to go through later.

Make Organization a Daily Habit
Don't think of it as cleaning up. Think of it as following your organization plan:

If you keep items, they should have a home. Use filing cabinets, labels, clear storage boxes, and over-the-door organizers.
Take 10 minutes each day to pick up and return items to their proper places.
If you take it out, put it back.
Keep a box for loose papers and other mislaid items to be put away. Go through it at the end of every day.

Keep Small Items Together
Place a small table or bookshelf near the entryway of your home. Put a tray or basket on top of it to hold important items such as keys, wallets, watches, glasses, and phones. You can also use this area to hold other items you want to remember, such as lunchboxes, briefcases, important papers, or outgoing mail.

Have a Rotating Menu

Planning regular meals for the entire family may be a challenge. Create a "Top 10" dinner list or regular rotating menu of dishes that you can cook easily. Try to keep those ingredients on hand, or list the ingredients on index cards that you can take with you. Don't carry the burden of feeding everyone yourself: Have a floating "free" night when you order takeout, or share the kitchen responsibilities with other family members.

Follow a Mail Routine
Develop a system for checking and sorting mail every day. One idea is to create a special area to hold all important mail, such as bills, insurance information, checks, and bank statements. Review this pile at least once a week, sorting bills into a pile to be paid, and filing other important documents where they belong. Stop junk mail from coming to your house by taking your name off mailing lists.
Write Down What You Spend
Managing money can be difficult for people with ADHD, especially if you tend to make impulse purchases. Carry a notebook or use an electronic device or financial website to keep track of everything you buy -- even very small purchases. Knowing how much you spend each month -- and on what -- will help you manage your money.

Use Electronic Reminders
Forgetting meetings, deadlines, medications, or other responsibilities can create problems at work and in your personal life. For help, turn to computer programs and other electronic devices to remind you of appointments and deadlines. For example, set your computer or smartphone to alert you five minutes before every event in your calendar.

Tune Out Distractions at Work
Distractions at work can be a big challenge for adults with ADHD. Try these strategies:

Route your calls to voicemail, then check it only at set times during the day.
Ask for a quiet cubicle or office at work, so you aren’t distracted by others.
Use a "white noise" machine or listen to earphones to drown out other sounds at work.
Stick to doing just one task at a time.

Fight Boredom
Many people with ADHD get bored easily -- especially during routine tasks or paperwork. This can make it difficult to stay focused at work. Try these tips:

Break up big tasks into smaller tasks.
Between tasks, take a walk or get fresh air.
Take notes in meetings.

Simplify Your Life with Fewer Tasks
Organizing and simplifying your surroundings will help you reduce clutter, keep track of your belongings, and remove some of the distractions that prevent you from focusing.

Simplifying can work for your schedule, too. Don't start a new project or task until you've finished the current one. Try not to overschedule yourself with too many projects or tasks at once. You may need to practice saying no to new tasks to stay focused.

Get More Exercise
Regular exercise may help manage your ADHD symptoms. At the very least, it can help you channel extra energy. But regular exercise and team sports can also help you work together with others, learn to set and meet goals, and feel better about yourself. Some research suggests that physical activity may stimulate parts of the brain associated with ADHD. Activities like yoga and karate may be better for ADHD because they offer opportunities for memorizing movements.
Start Tasks With 15-Minute Blocks
When you're having trouble starting a project, try this exercise:

Set a timer for 15 minutes.
For those 15 minutes, focus on that one task only.
When the time is up, decide if you can keep going for another 15 minutes.
If you can, reset the timer. Keep going at 15-minute intervals for as long as you can.
If you can't do any more, stop and try again later or the next day.

Use Color Coding
Colored files, folders, and notes can help you stay better organized. Here are a few examples:

Use color-coded files to keep track of different types of expenses, such as groceries, auto, entertainment, and utilities.
Use different colored pens or highlighting in your planner to separate work, personal, and family commitments.Learn From Your To-Do Lists
If you see a lot of unfinished tasks left on your "to-do" lists, try to figure out why. Did you try to get everything done at one time? Did you list big tasks that could have been broken down into smaller ones? Or did distractions keep you from completing your tasks? Use this information to help arrange future "to-do" lists, or to find ways to work more efficiently.

Distraction
This is the main symptom of ADHD. Your ADHD partner doesn’t seem to listen when you talk or fails to follow through on promises. You feel unheard, ignored, and unwanted. In reality, they may love you very much but are too distracted by the TV, the phone, or their own thoughts to show it.

Hyperfocus Strategies
If you’re prone to hyperfocus during certain activities, like online games or crossword puzzles, avoid them close to mealtimes or whenever you need to engage with your partner. Set alarms and track the time you spend on doing one thing. Get up or move to break your preoccupation when you realize you’re hyperfocusing. If you’re the partner or the spouse, try not to take it personally.

Forgetfulness Strategies
Forgetfulness and other ADHD symptoms aren’t character flaws. Avoid lectures and don’t label the behavior as rude or uncaring. Don’t take over for your partner, either. That can leave you both resentful. Instead, work with your partner to help them remember. Use a day planner or reminders on a smartphone or a laptop.

Procrastination Strategies
It’s easier to tackle a project when you break it into small chunks. Focus on only the first part -- don’t think about the rest of it until you finish step one. If you’re the partner, see if you can share a part of the task to offer company. But take care not to take over their responsibility. Most importantly, don’t think of procrastination as a personal defect, but as a trait that can be managed

Mood Swing
People with ADHD often have trouble controlling emotions. You might lash out in anger or have sudden or wide mood swings. That’s because you feel anxiety and frustration -- as well as joy and happiness -- more intensely than some others. That can leave your partner on edge.

Mood Swing Strategies
A healthy diet, good sleep, and regular exercise can head off mood swings. Yoga or tai chi can ease stress and help you control your impulses. If you’re the partner, don’t overreact to flare-ups. Instead, empathize but also explain how they affect you. Go on a hike or do something together.   

Staying organized
Organizational tools are a must for people with adult ADHD. They’ll help you prioritize and track activities for each day or the coming weeks.

Tools can include a pen and paper to make lists, or computer or smartphone apps to set appointment reminders, highlight important days on the calendar, mark deadlines, and keep lists and other information handy.

Set aside time each day to update your lists and schedules. Don’t let the task become a chore in itself; think of it like a routine task such as brushing your teeth, and do it daily so it becomes an established habit.

And a word of caution: smartphones and computers can also turn into a distraction. If you have adult ADHD, you may find yourself spending hours looking at less useful apps or sites. If that’s a frequent trap for you, set a timer for each use or keep the phone off or in another room when you are trying to work.